The Paragraph
A paragraph is a unit of thought; it is at once a unit in itself and part of a larger whole, that is, the essay. Paragraphs vary in length. In a short expository essay of about 600 words, the average paragraph may be about 100 words, or between four and eight sentences. Ultimately, the length of the paragraph depends on its topic, its position in the essay and its role in the development of the thesis statement. Paragraphs in books are usually longer than those in newspapers. A long paragraph expresses a complex idea, and a short one makes a major transition, an emphatic statement, or a summary. An experienced writer varies the length of his/ her paragraphs to avoid monotony.
I. Criteria of an Effective Paragraph
A paragraph is like a mini-essay; it should be unified, coherent and well developed. A paragraph is unified when all the sentences in the paragraph are focused on one central thought or on a single topic; when the writer wishes to introduce a new thought or topic, he/she should begin a new paragraph. A paragraph is coherent when it develops naturally and smoothly, and one sentence leads logically to another.
1.
Unity
Unity of a paragraph is concerned with its content. If all the sentences in the paragraph lead to one central theme, the paragraph is unified. The central theme is usually summarized in what is called the topic sentence. It often appears at the beginning of the paragraph; however, it may also be found in the middle or at the end of a paragraph.
j Sample 1
One of the central preoccupations of the arts and humanities is the observation of human beings. Painters and sculptors create images of the human form; writers tell stories or compose poems about human experience; musical artists give melodic contours to the human spirit; historians and philosophers ponder the essential qualities of human civilization and nature. And in our own lives, in our own ways, we spend a great deal of our energy and attention on our fellow creatures, being in families and other kinds of relationships, observing people with curiosity and interest in the course of the day, thinking about and forming our own character—deciding what kind of person we wish to be—as we grow.
—Don Knefel
Sample 2
We now have, as a result of modern means of communication, hundreds of thousands of words flung at us daily. We are constantly being talked at, by teachers, preachers, salesmen, public officials, and motion picture soundtracks. The cries of advertisers pursue us into our very homes, thanks to the radio—and in some houses the radio is never turned off from morning to night. Daily the newsboy brings us, in large cities, from thirty to fifty enormous pages of print, and almost three times that amount on Sunday. We go out and get more words at bookstores and libraries. Words fill our lives.
—P. Johnston
Task 1 Identify the topic sentence in Sample 1 and Sample 2. Pay attention to the difference of the two paragraphs.
Sometimes, the topic sentence is not stated explicitly but is implied. In the following paragraph, all the details contribute to one theme—what the room looks like. Though without a topic sentence, the paragraph is unified.
f Sample 3
The room is located on the fifth floor of the high building. One third of its total floor space is taken up by a double bed. Facing it, in the corner behind the door, stands a cupboard loaded with pots, bowls, dishes, bottles, and bags of rice and flour. A desk completely fills the gap between the bed and the wall with the window. Behind the desk is a chair, the only one in the room; and it almost touches the boxes and trunks piled against the wall on the opposite side.
—Student
Task 2 Identify the topic sentence in each of the following paragraphs.
1.
The forest is a sanitary agent. It is constantly eliminating impurities from the earth and the air. Trees check, sweep, and filter from the air quantities of filthy, germ-laden dust. Their leaves absorb poisonous gases from the air. Roots assist in drainage, and absorb impurities from the soil. Roots give off acids, and these acids, together with the acids released by the fallen, decaying leaves, have a sterilizing effect upon the soil. Trees help to keep the earth sweet and clean, and water which comes from a forested watershed is likely to be pure. Many unsanitary areas have been redeemed and rendered healthy by tree planting.
2.
She was an old woman and lived on a farm near the town in which 1 lived. All country and small-town people have seen such old women, but no one knows much about them. Such an old woman comes into town driving an old worn-out horse or she comes afoot carrying a basket. She may own a few hens and have eggs to sell. She brings them in a basket and takes them to a grocer. There she trades them in. She gets some salt pork and some beans. Then she gets a pound or two of sugar and some flour. Afterwards she goes to the butcher’s and asks for some dog meat. She never visits with any one, and as soon as she gets what she wants she starts for home.
3.
The need for humane studies, both in themselves and for scientists and professional men, is greater than it ever was. In international affairs and in a world where we have already reached the point where we can annihilate ourselves, the problem that we face will certainly not be solved by better and better weapons in the hands of opposing armed nations. They will be solved by a better understanding of men, by a public educated and enlightened enough to support that diplomacy. Until that solution appears, our governments must continue to arm and to develop weapons against the idiotic possibility of war, but our only hope of a long-term peace comes not from better weapons, but from humane agreement between men and nations.
Task 3 Supply a topic sentence for each of the following paragraphs:
1.
... Only last year I witnessed what might have been a fatal accident on the Beijing- Chengde Highway. I was motoring up from Beijing; and as 1 neared Chengde, I came upon the wreckage of two cars on the road. The smash had been caused by a car coming down, which swept round a sharp comer at eighty kilometers an hour and crashed into a car coming up. Happily no one was killed; but several were badly injured, and the two cars were wrecked. To drive at such a speed down a twisting mountain road is simply courting disaster.
2.
... Red, for example, is the color of fire, heat, blood and life. People say red is an exciting and active color. They associate red with a strong feeling like anger. Red is also used for signs of danger, such as stop signs and fire engines. Orange is the bright, warm color of leaves in autumn. People say orange is a lively color. They associate orange with happiness. Yellow is the color of sunlight. People say it is a cheerful color. They associate yellow, too, with happiness. Green is the cool color of grass in spring. People say it is a refreshing color.
3.
... It is the road which determines the sites of many cities and the growth and nourishment of all. It is the road which controls the development of strategies and fixes the sites of battles. It is the road that gives its framework to all economic development. It is the road which is the channel of all trade, and, what is more important, of all ideas. In its most humble function it is a necessary guide without which progress from place to place would be a ceaseless experiment; it is a sustenance without which organized society would be impossible, thus the road moves and controls all history.
4.
... A dog will follow his master anywhere, but a cat keeps to the house it is used to: and even when the house changes hands, the cat will remain there, so long as it is kindly treated by the new owners. A cat does not seem to be capable of the personal devotion often shown by a dog. It thinks most of its own comfort, and its love is only cupboard love.
2.
Coherence
Coherence of a paragraph is concerned with its form, or its organization. The sentences in a paragraph should be arranged in a clear, logical order, and the transitions should be smooth and natural. As a result, the reader finds it easy to follow the writer’s train of thought and understand what he is talking about.
f Sample 4
There is some feeling nowadays that reading is not as necessary as it once was. Radio and especially television have taken over many of the functions once served by print, just as photography has taken over functions once served by painting and other graphic arts. Admittedly, television serves some of these functions extremely well; the visual communication of news events, for example, has enormous impact. The ability of radio to give us information while we are engaged in doing other things—for instance, driving a car—is remarkable, and a great saving of time. But it may be seriously questioned whether the advent of modern communications media has much enhanced our understanding of the world in which we live.
—Mortimer J. Adler
[Analysis]
This paragraph is coherent. The writer begins with a statement, and then he goes on to explain what have made some people feel that “reading is not as necessary as it once was”—radio and television have almost replaced the functions of the printed matter. What follows further explains how watching the television and listening to the radio serve some of the functions of reading. But the writer doubts whether the appearance of modem communications media has really promoted our understanding of the world, which he expresses in the last sentence, the topic sentence of the paragraph.
f Sample 5
Shakespearian characters live. They are no stilted creations intended to represent differing points of view. They are people, with all the usual human foibles and weaknesses. As we laugh at or sympathize with them, we are learning something about our own selves. Shakespeare knew human nature so well and created his characters according to that knowledge. His understanding of human psychology is amazing and is one reason for the continued success of Shakespearian drama.
—A. Greenwood-Lee
Task 4 Analyze the above paragraph—Sample 5. Is it a coherent paragraph? How does it achieve its aim?
3.
Transition
Coherence may not be perfect even if the writer arranges his sentences in a clear, logical order. He has to use good transitions so that one sentence runs smoothly to another.
The following ways may help the writer to produce a fluent paragraph:
•
Using parallel structures;
•
Repeating words or word groups;
•
Using pronouns to refer to nouns in preceding sentences;
•
Being consistent in the person and number of nouns and pronouns, and the tense of verbs;
•
Using transitional expressions.
In the following paragraph, note how the writer makes use of all these ways to achieve coherence.
f Sample 6
Americans are queer people: they can’t play. Americans rush to work as soon as they grow up. They want their work as soon as they wake. It is a stimulant—the only one they are not afraid of. They used to open their offices at ten o’clock; then at nine; then at eight; then at seven. Now they never shut them. Every business in America is turning into an open-all-day-and-night business. They eat all night, dance all night, build buildings all night, make a noise all night. They can’t play. They try to, but can’t. They turn football into a fight, baseball into a lawsuit, and yachting into machinery. They can’t play. The little children can’t play; they use mechanical toys instead—toy cranes, hoisting toy loads, toy machinery spreading a toy industrial depression of infantile dullness. The grown-up people can’t play; they use a mechanical gymnasium and a clockwork horse. They can’t laugh; they hire a comedian and watch him laugh.
—Stephen Leacock
[Analysis]
This paragraph is a good example of making use of different transitional expressions to achieve coherence. For instance, the author repeatedly uses word groups to stress the central theme of the paragraph. The “then” group serves to stress the longer hours Americans now put into their work. The “all night” and “turn...into...” groups leave the readers an unmistakable impression of how the Americans have worked themselves to the limit. The key phrase of the paragraph, “can’t play” appears five times to emphasize the theme. Besides, the author repeatedly uses the pronoun “they" to refer to the Americans, young and old, which helps the related sentences run smoothly to the next ones.