Diction
Diction is the choice and use of words. The English language has a very large vocabulary: as
many as 400,000 words are collected in the Oxford English Dictionary. Of course no one knows
or need to use so many words. Only a small part of them are used by ordinary people fbr ordinary
purposes. Students learning to write should learn to use the words that are most useful and most
often used to express themselves. Sometimes one may use the wrong words, but more often the
words one uses are not entirely wrong, but inappropriate, inexact, unidiomatic or uninteresting. A
basic knowledge of diction may be of help.
I. Levels off Words
The words that are often used may be divided, from a stylistic point of view, into three types:
formal, common, and informal
Formal words may also be called learned words, or literary words, or “big" words. They
mainly appear in formal writing, such as scholarly or theoretical works, political and legal
documents, and formal lectures and addresses. Many such words contain three or more than three
syllables; most of them are of Greek or Latin origin. They are seldom used in daily conversation,
except fbr special purposes. Here is a paragraph from a scholarly paper which contains some of
the features of formal English:
There is nothing new in the recognition, within a given language, of a distinction between common
usage and uses of the language for more restricted purposes and often enough, perhaps
characteristically, more elevated purposes. The monolithic nature of English is not questioned when
literary essayists like Emerson contrast poetry and common speech. The latter is recognized in
America to be the proper subject for the investigation of linguists who, however, now show some
incipient inclination to investigate poetry, too, and other noncasual utterances in a given language.
—C. F. Voegelin
There arc only three sentences in this paragraph; all of them are long and involved.
And there are in it quite a few formal or learned words, such as recognition, characteristically,
elevated, monolithic, investigation, incipient, inclinationy noncasual, and utterances. Long
sentences and formal words are appropriate here because the paper, which discusses a rather
complex question, needs them to be theoretically clear and exact.
Most of the words in the paragraph, however, are those that people use every day, and
appear in all kinds of writing. Because of this, they are called common words. Read the following
paragraph:
When I was a kid, and reading every science fiction book in the local library, I used to wonder
exactly how the future would happen. By that I don't mean what the future would be //ke-science
fiction already told me that—but rather how we'd actually get there. Science fiction books seemed to
agree, for example, that in the future there would be no money—all transactions would be made via
identity cards and centralized computers. But that seemed dubious to me: how, I wondered, are you
going to get everybody to give up money in the first place?
—Michael Rogers
In this paragraph, except one or two words that are informal, like kid, and one or two that
are a little formal, like transactions and dubious, all the words are commonly used words. The
sentences are much shorter and simpler than those in the preceding paragraph. Such vocabulary
and sentence structure fit the content of the paragraph, as it describes the thoughts of a child.
There are words which are mainly used in informal or familiar conversation. They seldom
appear in formal writing, and in literary works their main use is to record people's thoughts and
dialogs. They are usually short words of one or two syllables and most of them are of Saxon
origin (i.e., not borrowed from Greek, Latin, or French). We may call them informal words, such
as guts (meaning courage), guy (man), and hassle (bother).
Here is a paragraph with some of these words:
You have your tension. Sometimes you come close to having an accident, that upsets you. You
just escape maybe by a hair or so. Sometimes maybe you get a disgruntled passenger on there, and
starts a big argument. Traffic. You have someone who cuts you off or stops in front of the bus. There's
a lot of tension behind that. You got to watch all the time. You*re watchin' the drivers, youYe watchin'
other cars. Most of the time you have to drive for the other drivers, to avoid hitting them. So you take
the tension home with you.
—Studs Terkel
This is part of a talk given by a Chicago driver. He uses very colloquial words and
expressions like there 3, you re, by a hair or so, on there, cuts you off, and you got to. But most of
the words he uses are common words.
Thus there are three levels of words, with the formal or learned at the top, the informal at the
bottom, and the common in the middle. Common words are good for all kinds of writing; formal
words are as a rule seldom used in informal writing, while informal words are seldom used in
formal writing, unless fbr some special purpose or effect.
These are all words of standard English, which is used by all educated speakers of
the language. There are words which are used only by special groups of people fbr special
effect. Among these are slang words, dialectal words and certain words that are often used by
uneducated speakers.
Sla ng words ar e highly informal; they may be vivid an d interesting , but they may, when
used inappro priate ly, make the writer or sp eaker sound ofle n sive or funny:
On hearing that his father had kicked the bucket, we wrote him a letter to express our sympathies.
The big banquet held in honor of the distinguished guests was really neat.
Because o f the slang exp ressions, the first sentence does not really so und sympathetic, and
the second one is not serious in tone.
In the following passage a ta nne r said some angry words about the school teacher who had
taken his pupils out on a field trip:
I'll attend to that myself in th' mornin'. I'll take keer o' 'im. He ain't from this county nohow. I'll go
down there in th' mornin' and see'im. Lettin* you leave your books and gall ivant all over th* hills. What
kind of a school is it nohow! Didn't do that, my son, when I's a little shaver in school.
- J e s se Stuart
The farmer s d ia le ct is shown in his pronunciatio n: he om its ce rt ain so unds an d pronounc es
-E g like -in and care like keer. He uses ain t fbr isn't. I s fbr / was, and nohow' for anyhow. These
words, which may be used by uneduc at ed speakers, are not o f standard vocabulary. A litt le shaver
is a slang expression m eaning a little boy.
Such nonstandar d (or substandard) words and expressions are often seen in stories describing
poorly educated people. Foreign students o f English need to understa nd them, but s hould not try
to use them in speech or writing.
Task 1 Read the following pass age ca refully and answer the questions:
I. From what type o f book is this passage taken? What do you think is the purpose o f the book?
2. Is the book written for scientists or fbr or dinary readers?
3. Are there slang ex p ressions in the passage? Are there formal words in it? Giv e examples.
4. Is the diction appr opriat e fbr the content o f the following pas sage? Give reasons.
Language is ou r facility to talk to each other. The word lalk ' is used not merely to avoid a rather
more technical and high-sounding word like 'communicate*; talk is more precise and more relevant to
the special n ature of human language than 'communica te'. In the first place, all creat ures― cat,
sparrow, and b e e-ca n be said to communicate with each other to some extent. Th ey can at tract each
other's attention, warn of danger, woo their mates, and dire ct the way to food. We are still learning ju st
ho w w ell animals can com m u n ica te with each o th er, but there can be no d o ubt th a t an i m al
communicat ion is w holly rudimentary as compared with the complex and subtle control of language
possessed by even the least intelligent or least educated English tramp or Australian aboriginal. It is therefore appropriate to say that language involves talk' to emphasize that language is a peculiarly
human activity.